# Getting started with Quartermaster

There are usually three groups of users interested in working with
Quartermaster: open source officers, continuous integration operators,
and software developers. Open source officers use documentation
produced by Quartermaster to manage compliance of software
products. Continuous integration (CI) operators set up software builds
that are instrumented with Quartermaster to produce compliance
documentation when software packages are created. Software developers
integrate Quartermaster into their development setup to monitor
compliance and reproduce test results. This tutorial will begin to
explain the basics and building blocks of Quartermaster from the
perspective of a software developer. The CI operator and open source
office perspetive will be covered in later articles.

## Prerequisites

To execute Quartermaster as part of a software build, the client side
tools and the master container image need to be available on the
system. Follow the [installation instructions](Installation.md) to get
those installed.

Verify that the client side tools are available by querying the
version of the `qmstrctl` tool:

    > qmstrctl version
    This is qmstrctl version 0.1.

To check that the master image exists, run

    > docker images | grep qmstr/master
    ...

For the remainder of this tutorial, Git, internet access and the basic
development tools to build a C library on Linux will be required.

## Step 0: Making sure your software builds

Before even trying to get started with Quartermaster, make sure that
the project that is going to be analyzed (we call it the _project
under analysis_) builds properly in your
environment. Otherwise it may be difficult later to separate issues
with running Quartermaster from regular build errors. We generally
recommend to first make sure the project under analysis builds and
then add Quartermaster instrumentation in a second step.

This tutorial will use the JSON-C library as the
project under analysis. The files referenced in the following steps
are locatedd in the [tutorial](tutorial/) subdirectory. Let's retrieve
the JSON-C source code first, in a specific revision that we know
works with this tutorial:

	> cd doc/tutorial
	> git clone git@github.com:json-c/json-c.git
	...
	> cd json-c
	> git reset --hard bf29aa0f
	...

All JSON-C specific parts of the build have been automated in a [build
script](tutorial/build-json-c.sh). Let's run it to make sure our
environment is configured to build JSON-C from scratch:

	> ../build-json-c.sh
	...

If this works, wonderful. If not, please dig into the output and check
for errors. Quartermaster tracks what sources are compiled and what
targets are linked in your project. To be sure that everything gets
compiled again after instrumentation, let's clean the repository:

	> git clean -fxd
	...
	> cd ..

## Step 1: Start a Quartermaster master process

Every build that is instrumented with Quartermaster needs a master
process. Every Quartermaster master needs a configuration file,
usually called [qmstr.yaml](tutorial/qmstr.yaml). The configuration
file is located in the tutorial/ directory because in our case, we are
avoiding to make changes to the project under analysis. Let's start
the master:

	> cd json-c
	> eval `qmstrctl start --wait --config ../qmstr.yaml`

The `wait` flag makes sure that the command returns only after the
master has finished starting up and is fully operational. The `config`
flag points to the configuration file. If it is not specified,
`qmstrctl` looks for a file called `qmstr.yaml` in  the current
directory.

## Step 2: Build (this time under instrumentation)

For C based builds, Quartermaster modifies the environment in a way
that it can trace the calls to the compiler and linker. This
instrumentation is build-system specific. The details of how build
system instrumentation works are beyond this tutorial. Thankfully,
Quartermaster comes with a tool that automates the necessary tweaks to
the shell environment. It modifies the environment for the command it
executes, and then resets it again before exiting. In the next step,
we will use this tool to call the build script from step 0 (above):

	> qmstr ../build-json-c.sh
	...

This script performs the same configure and build process as before,
but this time with Quartermaster instrumentation. The master receives
the build information and constructs a build graph that is later used
for analysis and reporting.  Note that the project under analysis is
completely unchanged, including the build system and configuration
files.

## Step 3: Analysis

The configuration file lists a number of modules in the `package/analysis:`
section. Each of these modules are individual programs that are
shipped and installed with the master, and extend the build graph with
additional information. Usually, an individual analyzer performs a
small set of very specific tasks. The `git-analyzer` extracts the
current revision and other metadata from the repository of the project
under analysis. The `spdx-analyzer` scans input files and package
manifests for project metadata in SPDX format. The
`scancode-analyzer` identifies licenses and authors of the source
files. Most of this functionality is provided by existing
tools. Quartermaster avoids implementing features that already exist,
like a license scanner. Instead, it provides the glue code to
integrate these tools into the Quartermaster workflow and knowledge
graph. The modules mentioned above are shipped with Quartermaster. It
is however possible and intended to implement custom modules. This
will be explained in a later tutorial.

	> qmstrctl analyze
	...

The master will execute the configured analysis modules in the order
they are specified. Depending on the selected modules, this step may
take a while. All analysis results are stored within the master by
augmenting and extending the build graph generated in earlier
steps. This way, a combined picture of dynamic build-time analysis and
the results of the analyzers is created that serves as the input for
the reporters.

## Step 4: Reporting

Similarly to analyzers, reporters are configured in the
`package/reporting:` section of the configuration file. While analysis
refers to any action that augments the knowledge graph with additional
information, the graph is not allowed to change anymore during
reporting, it is frozen. Any functionality that processes the
information in the knowledge graph and performs some action based on
it is considered a report. A reporter may create output files, or
submit messages to an IRC channel, or interact with an issue tracker.

	> qmstrctl report
	...

Again, the master executes the configured reporters in order.

## Step 5: Shutting down the master

The life span of the master roughly matches that of the build
itself. The master is started right before the build is performed, and
should under normal circumstances be shut down after the build is
finished.

	> qmstrctl quit
	...

The `quit` command makes the reporting results available in the
`qmstr` subdirectory of the build directory (a different location may
be specified in the configuration file):

	> ls qmstr/HTML_Reporter/qmstr-html-reports.tar.bz2
	qmstr-html-reports.tar.bz2

Once the master is shut down, all data that it collected during the
build and analysis phases is destroyed. Any information that is
needed in later stages has to be "reported" as a build artifact by one
of the reporting modules.

